Inclusive Education and Education Policies in India

Bablu Karan
Research Scholar
School of Education
Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar, India
Email: bablu.karan@cug.ac.in
                                                                                                                          &
Chitra Chakma
Research Scholar
School of Education
Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar, India
Email: chitra.chakma@cug.ac.in

Abstract
Education for all is a global concerned and every child has equal right to learn. Inclusive education is the outmost effective way to give all children a fair opportunity to go to school, learn and develop the life skills they need to thrive. Driving all type of children under the roof of one classroom environment of a school has been globalized by one of sustainable development goals (SDG 4) that ensure inclusive and equitable quality education along with promoting lifelong learning opportunities for all. The essence of inclusive education becomes high priority in public policy of every nation. India, as a nation, has also shown a high inclination to promoting inclusion in its system of education. The present study explores about various initiatives that reflected in its three policies of education to promote inclusive education. At the same time, the study also makes an explorative comparison of these education policies with respect to how different steps and actions taken for inclusive education at all levels of education. Since its long time back, India has been promoting inclusive education through different ways that are stipulated in its education polices, and the study has inclusively attempted to establish such endeavors and actions towards quality inclusive education of the nation.

Keywords: Inclusive Education, Education Policies, School Education, Disadvantage Group


Introduction	
Inclusive education as an approach seeks to address the learning needs of all children, youth and adults with a specific focus on those who are vulnerable to marginalization and exclusion. It implies all learners, young people with or without disabilities being able to learn together through access to common provisions, schools and community educational setting with an appropriate network (Comprehensive Action Plan for Inclusive Education, 2005). Inclusive education presents an opportunity for students with special needs to attend mainstream classrooms with their age-group peers. It allows school children of all backgrounds to learn and grow together and refers to an education system that accommodates all children regardless of their physical, intellectual, social, emotional, linguistic or other conditions. It is all about learning together even if they differ from each other in styles and pace of learning. “Those with special educational needs must have access to regular schools which should accommodate them within a child centered pedagogy capable of meeting these needs” (The Salamanca Statement, 1994). There is a need of effective inclusive education system to give all children a fair chance to go to school, learn and develop the skills they need to achieve. Keeping this, the nation urges to provide relevant inclusive conditions of overcoming the barriers to the learning process of every child which is reflected decades after decades on various acts, schemes, provision and educational policies.

National policy on Education (1968) and Inclusive Education
NPE 1968 came into exist with numbers of provisions and recommendations in the system of Indian education. It was brought with the recommendation of Indian Education Commission (1664-66). Though, it does not stipulate any components of inclusive education in its entire sections, it primarily focuses some recommendations given by Education Commission, which are the foremost pillar of today’s inclusive education. The first focus is on Free and Compulsory Education for all children up to the age of fourteen by developing suitable programme and ensuring that every child who enrolled in the school successfully completes the course. The second focus is on Equalization of Educational Opportunity which emphasizes common school system to balance the provision of educational facilities between urban, rural and other backward areas. It also recommends to admitting students on the basis of their merits and to free studentships to stop the feelings of social isolation in class. The main recommendation of NPE 1968 towards inclusive education is to provide special educational facilities for mentally and physically handicapped children in developing integrated programme which surprisingly enables those children to study in regular schools.
 
National policy on Education (1986) and Inclusive Education
NPE 1986 also like earlier policy does not directly use the term ‘inclusive education.’ But it tries to promote inclusive education in initial stage through various ways. Focusing the recommendations of earlier policy in regards of inclusive education, it has stipulated few new ones to bring into exist which are directly and or indirectly striving inclusive education.  In its part-III under the name of National System of Education, NPE 1986 states that ‘all students, irrespective of caste, creed, location or sex, have access to education of a comparable quality.’ This term, ‘comparable quality’ is the indicator of equality of opportunity which is the leading path of inclusive and it has precisely stated that to promote equality, it is necessary to provide equal opportunity to all, not only in access, but also in the condition for success. 

In its part IV under Education for Equality, it emphasizes on the removal of all types of disparities, education for women’s equality, education for schedule caste, minorities, handicapped and education for backward sections and areas. NPE 1986 has stipulated these to give special focus on their education and focused to provide scaffolding so that they come to the mainstream of educational society. In case of disabled child, NPE has stated ‘to integrate the physically and mentally handicapped with the general community as equal partners, to prepare them for normal growth and to enable them to face life with courage and confidence.’ Emphasizing these parameters of social inclusion, the NPE 1986 inherently strives the elements of inclusive education which are later become the basis of today’s inclusive setup in education. Especially, it has laid emphasized on ‘National Education System’ which should drive social inclusion through redesigning curricula, textbooks, training and orientation of the teachers, decision-makers and administrators, so that women and all types of learners can do fully participate in vocational, technical, emergent technological and professional education at different levels. Keeping in mind for the children of SCs, and STs at main stream schooling, NPE 1986 takes special attention to provide remedial courses, instructional materials in tribal languages at the initial stages, focusing on their sociocultural context in their education and other incentives to improve their learning performances; and it took initiated to design curricula with the rich cultural identity of the tribal as well as with their indigenous creative power.

National Education policy (2020) and Inclusive Education
NEP 2020 comes out with several changes in Indian education system at all levels. It enormously emphasizes on the recent demands of education in national as well as global context. The core objectives of new NEP stated itself in its ‘Vision’, which are vividly reflected on its entire sections. In its each section and in each component, it accentuates to make integration of all the stipulated provision towards inclusion. NEP 2020, unlike earlier two policies, exactly coined the term ‘inclusive education’ under the heading of ‘School Education.’ In its vision, it is stated; “The National Education Policy 2020 envisions an India-centered education system that contributes directly to transforming our Nation sustainably into an equitable and vibrant knowledge society, by providing high quality education to all.” Pointing out ‘high quality education to all,’ it strives to make a common and/or unique educational system which will ensure equality, quality and holistic integrity to all. The principles of this policy itself has laid emphasize to respect for diversity, and to put local context in curricula, pedagogy and policy which must ensure full equity and inclusion in education. It hopes that this inclusion must enable all students to thrive in the system of education.

Under the heading of ‘Equitable and Inclusive Education: Learning for All,’ NEP clearly describes the importance of inclusion and equitable education, and the factors that affect inclusion including prejudice and bias in regards of gender, social, economic status and special needs of the children. It envisions an education system that should benefit all children so that no child losses any opportunities to learn and excel because of any grounds. To bringing inclusion, it identified Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs) in education for their special attention including gender identities for women and transgender; socio-cultural identities for STs, SCs, OBCs, Muslims, Migrant Communities; Children with Special needs for learning disabilities; socio-economic conditions for urban and poor. It recommends strongly to renew existing policies and schemes such as scholarships, incentives, etc. for improving education of these SEDGs groups. Peer tutoring, open schooling, providing bicycles for more girls participation and appropriate infrastructure must be provided to ensure access can be particularly effective for certain children with special needs. It is also recommended that certain regions of the country with large populations of Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Groups should be declared as Special Education Zones (SEZ), where all schemes and policies need to be implemented to the maximum through additional concerted efforts and funding from the Centre and States to improve educational landscape of the Zone. The new policy also focuses more on girls’ education because it recognises the special and critical role of women in society and in shaping social mores not only in their own generation but in the next one. Therefore, it recommends to create ‘Inclusive Fund’ for uplifting girl’s students specially coming from SEDGs section.

Education is the single greatest tool for achieving social justice and equality. The new education poly itself vision that the education system of the country must aim to benefit India’s children so that no child loses any opportunity to learn and excel because of circumstances of birth or background. And it reaffirms to bridging the social category gaps in access and participation. All participants in the school education system, including teachers, principals, administrators, counsellors, and students, are to be sensitized to the requirements of all students, the notions of inclusion and equity, and the respect, dignity, and privacy of all persons. Such an educational culture has been initiated to provide the best pathway to help students become empowered individuals who, in turn, will enable society to transform into one that is responsible towards its most vulnerable citizens. The policy do vision for students to be sensitized through this new school culture that must be created by teachers, trained social workers and counsellors to bring in an inclusive school curriculum. The school curriculum will include, early on, material on human values such as respect for all persons, empathy, tolerance, human rights, gender equality, non-violence, global citizenship, inclusion, and equity. It would also include more detailed knowledge of various cultures, religions, languages, gender identities, etc. to sensitize and develop respect for diversity. 

In addition, the new policy further suggested government of India to constitute a ‘Gender-Inclusive Fund’ to promote quality education of girls and transgender. It criticizes that all the existing policies are not sufficient to striving full inclusion. It is necessary for teachers, principals, administrators, counselors, and students, to be sensitized in respect of their needs, access of inclusion, respect and dignity for all. It also tries to keep up an inclusive school culture, and inclusion and equity should be the key aspects of teacher education, training for all school leaders, administrators. It significantly invites high quality teachers and leaders from SEDGs group in order to bring in excellent role models for all students. The policy emphasizes to make students more sensitize with the changes in school curriculum, includes empathy, tolerances, inclusion and equity for develop of human values. The new education policy did not limited to school education, but it also initiates in teacher and higher education to ensure inclusion. For this, it recommended highest priorities in making quality higher education opportunities available to all individuals; and envisions in ensuring equitable access to quality education to all students with a special emphasis on socially-economically disadvantage group (SEDGs).

Conclusion
To conclude, it is true to state that the nation has been taking significant initiatives for the inclusion in education through its various policies and their schemes since its long back.  Analysis of these three national education policies it has been seen that the policies have stipulated various schemes, provisions and recommended an inclusive environment to be integrated in school culture and its curriculum. It is observed that NPE 1986 tried to stipulate components of inclusive education but not in direct manners. It focused such provisions of equity and equalization which creates the basis of inclusion at later. The NPE 1986 also did in the same pattern by re-accepting and emphasizing the recommendations of previous one. Overall, the earlier two policies directly and indirectly had tried to balance the inclusion through mingling with other components in some sections. But, new NEP 2020 recognizes inclusion education in its independent section. It truly understands the importance and need of inclusive education for the potential development of each child. Focusing special emphasis on inclusion and inclusive culture, NEP 2020 makes a special attention for the nation in pen and papers. Now, it is observable to follow up its implementation part in real situation. It is obliged to state that the country is truly realizing the essence and importance of inclusive education, which reflected in new NEP, for national integration, social inclusion and national development. 



References
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India (1968). Nation Policy on Education 1968. Accessed 08 June 2020. https://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/document-reports/NPE-1968.pdf
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India (1986). Nation Policy on Education 1986. Accessed 08 June 2020. https://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/document-reports/NPE86-mod92.pdf
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India (2020). National Education Policy 2020. Accessed 10 November 2020. https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/NEP_Final_English_0.pdf 
National Council of Education Research and Training, Government of India (2007). Meeting Special Needs in Schools: A Manual. Accessed 10 November 2020. http://www.ncert.nic.in/html/pdf/inclusive_education/COVER.pdf 
Singh, A. (2005). Comprehensive Action Plan for Inclusive Education. New Delhi: Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India. Accessed 20 April 2020 http://www.ncpedp.org/eductn/ed-isu2.htm  
UNESCO, U., UNPFA, U., UNICEF, & UN, W. (2015). Incheon Declaration and Framework for Action for the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 4. Accessed 20 April 2020. http://uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/education-2030-incheon-framework-for-action-implementation-of-sdg4-2016-en_2.pdf 
UNESCO. (1994). The Salamanca Statement and Framework for action on special needs education: Adopted by the World Conference on Special Needs Education; Access and Quality. Salamanca, Spain, 7-10 June 1994. UNESCO. Accessed 10 November 2020 https://www.right-to-education.org/sites/right-to-education.org/files/resource attachments/Salamanca_Statement_1994.pdf 
 

